[en] Blog post on Confidential Kubernetes (#38973)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2023-01-17-confidential-kubernetes.md

Additionally, we should mention [ARM TrustZone](https://www.arm.com/technologies/trustzone-for-cortex-a) which is optimized for embedded devices such as smartphones, tablets, and smart TVs, as well as [AWS Nitro Enclaves](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/nitro/nitro-enclaves/) which are only available on [Amazon Web Services](https://aws.amazon.com/) and have a different attacker model compared to the CPU-based solutions by Intel and AMD.

### Security Properties and Feature Set

In the following, we will review the security properties and additional features these new technologies bring to the table. Not all solutions will provide all properties, and we will discuss each technology in further detail in their respective chapter.

The **Confidentiality** property ensures that information cannot be viewed while it is in use in the TEE. This provides us with the highly desired feature to secure **data in use**. Depending on the specific TEE used, both code and data may be protected from outside viewers.

> Confidentiality is a great feature, but an attacker would still be able to manipulate or inject arbitrary code and data for the TEE to execute and therefore easily leak critical information. **Integrity** allows a TEE owner to check that neither code nor data has been tempered before running critical computations.

Reviewer: `Integrity allows a TEE owner to check that neither code nor data has been tempered before running critical computations.` --> `Integrity guarantees a TEE owner that neither code nor data can be tampered with while running critical computations.`

The current wording, particularly where we say that it allows an owner to check the code before a computation, sounds a bit more like attestation to me.

*Availability* is the third basic property often [discussed in information security](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_security). This property is outside the scope of most TEEs. Usually, they can be controlled (shutdown, restarted, ...) by some higher-level concept. This could be the CPU itself, a hypervisor, or a kernel. This is to preserve the availability of the overall system, and not the TEE itself. When running in the cloud the availability is usually guaranteed by the cloud provider in [terms of Service Level Agreements (SLAs)](https://cloud.google.com/compute/sla) and is not cryptographically enforceable.

> Confidentiality and Integrity by themselves would only be helpful in some cases. For example, consider a TEE running in a remote cloud. How would you know that the TEE is genuine and running your intended software? It could be an imposter stealing your data as soon as you send it over. This fundamental problem is addressed by **Attestability**. Remote attestation allows us to verify the identity, confidentiality, and integrity of TEEs based on cryptographic certificates issued from the hardware itself.

Reviewer: Is the word remote appropriate in the last sentence?

Author: Good point, I've added a sentence to clarify.

> TEEs can hold and process information that needs to persist even beyond their lifespan. That could mean across restarts, different versions, or platform migrations. Therefore **Recoverability** is an important feature. Data and the state of a TEE need to be sealed before they are written to persistent storage to maintain confidentiality and integrity guarantees. The access to such sealed data needs to be well-defined. In most cases, the unsealing is bound to a TEE's identity. Hence, making sure the recovery can only happen in the same confidential context.

Reviewer: I think we could potentially leave this paragraph out as well as the section on migration.

This does not have to limit the flexibility of the overall system. The [migration agent (MA) of AMD SEV-SNP](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf) allows users to migrate a confidential virtual machine to a different host system. All the while keeping the security properties of the TEE intact.

## Feature Comparison

In the following, we will dive a little bit deeper into the specific implementations, compare supported features and analyze the security properties.

### AMD SEV

AMD's [Secure Encrypted Virtualization (SEV)](https://developer.amd.com/sev/) technologies are a set of features to enhance the security of virtual machines on AMD's server CPUs. SEV transparently encrypts the memory of each VM with a unique key.
SEV can also calculate a signature of the memory contents, which can be sent to the VM's owner as an attestation that the memory was encrypted correctly by the firmware.

> The second generation of SEV called [Encrypted State (SEV-ES)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/Protecting%20VM%20Register%20State%20with%20SEV-ES.pdf) provides additional protection from the hypervisor by encrypting all CPU register contents when a VM stops running.

Reviewer: I think that technically, SEV-ES is a feature, rather than a generation of SEV. It might be more accurate to say that the second generation of AMD EPYC processors (Rome) support a feature called SEV-ES.

> The third generation of SEV called [Secure Nested Paging (SNP)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf) is designed to prevent software-based integrity attacks and reduce the risk associated with

Reviewer: Same as above.

compromised memory integrity. The basic principle of SEV-SNP integrity is that if a VM can read
a private (encrypted) memory page, it must always read the value it last wrote.
Additionally, by allowing the guest to obtain remote attestation statements dynamically, SNP enhances the remote attestation capabilities of SEV.

> SEV is continually upgraded with new features and improvements with each new generation. The Linux community makes these features available as part of the KVM hypervisor, host, and guest kernel. The first SEV features were discussed and implemented in [2016](https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/kaplan). After that, the SEV-ES feature set was implemented in [2020](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-ES-Linux-2020-Patches). Recently, the latest feature set was [merged in Linux 5.19 in July 2022](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-SNP-Arrives-Linux-5.19) and enabled support for SEV-SNP.

Reviewer: It might be better to say that SEV has been implemented incrementally rather than say that it is continually upgraded, because that implies that it will continue to be upgraded, which we can't really confirm.

Confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-SNP are [available in Microsoft Azure since July 2022](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/updates/azureconfidentialvm/). Similarly, [Google Cloud Platform (GCP)](https://cloud.google.com/compute/confidential-vm/docs/about-cvm) offers confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-ES.

### Intel SGX

> [Intel's Software Guard Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/software-guard-extensions/overview.html) is available since 2015 [introduced with the Skylake architecture](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/88172/intel-xeon-processor-e31220-v5-8m-cache-3-00-ghz.html).

Reviewer: `is available` -> `has been available`.

SGX is a new instruction set that enables users to create a protected and isolated process called an *enclave*.

> It provides a reverse sandbox that protects enclaves from the OS, BIOS, firmware, and any other privileged execution context.

Reviewer: Reverse sandbox is an interesting term.  It is only used in the SGX section, but it seems like it would apply to enclaves more generally? It implies that there  is little protection of the host from the guest, is that true for SGX?

Author: I have not written this particular sentence, can someone chime in @mythi @m1ghtym0 ?

A complete list of supported platforms is available on [ark.intel.com](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/search/featurefilter.html?productType=873&2_SoftwareGuardExtensions=Yes%20with%20both%20Intel%C2%AE%20SPS%20and%20Intel%C2%AE%20ME).

However, there are still several security limitations faced by SGX. Such as Cache timing attacks, physical attacks, untrusted I/O, or malicious microcode patching.

[Several SGX-specific attacks](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.13598.pdf) were published. Among others [Prime+Probe](https://gruss.cc/files/malware_guard_extension.pdf) and [SGAxe](https://sgaxe.com/files/SGAxe.pdf).

> TODO: Should we mention attacks? If we do, we should also mention attacks on all technologies. Do we have a stance / recommendation here or do we provide the information and let the reader decide?

> SGX is available on [Azure](https://azure.microsoft.com/de-de/updates/intel-sgx-based-confidential-computing-vms-now-available-on-azure-dedicated-hosts/), [Alibaba Cloud](https://azure.microsoft.com/de-de/updates/intel-sgx-based-confidential-computing-vms-now-available-on-azure-dedicated-hosts/), [IBM](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/bare-metal?topic=bare-metal-bm-server-provision-sgx), and many more.

Reviewer: It might be worth noting that SGX originally had a limited memory capacity, but that this has been remedied in more recent release. Also, SGX has typically required modification  of a workload or use of a library OS.

It is probably beyond the scope to compare overhead and frequency of context switches, but might be something to allude to.

### Intel TDX

Where Intel SGX aims to protect the context of a single process, [Intel's Trusted Domain Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-trust-domain-extensions.html) protects a full virtual machine and is therefore most closely comparable to AMD SEV.

> As with SEV-SNP support for TDX was [merged in Linux Kernel 5.19](https://www.phoronix.com/news/Intel-TDX-For-Linux-5.19), but hardware support will land with [Saphire Rapids](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sapphire_Rapids) in early 2023.

Reviewer: This is only guest support, right?

Reviewer 2: Yes, the host support is still being [discussed](https://lore.kernel.org/linux-mm/755f94aa-a0cc-b7d6-ce8a-a81ff4f598da@intel.com/T/).

## Overhead Analysis

> The benefits that confidential computing technologies provide via strong isolation and enhanced security to customer data and workloads are not for free. Quantifying this impact isn't easy and depends on many factors: The TEE technology, the benchmark, the metrics, and the type of workload have a huge impact on the induced performance overhead.

Reviewer: I think we could maybe get rid of this section. We don't really offer any meaningful conclusions. Instead maybe we can briefly mention performance in the section above.

Intel SGX-based TEEs are hard to benchmark as [shown](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.06415.pdf) [by](https://www.ibr.cs.tu-bs.de/users/mahhouk/papers/eurosec2021.pdf) [different papers](https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3533737.3535098). Since enclaves are process isolated, the operating system's libraries are not available and additional SDKs are required to compile programs for SGX. The chosen SDK as well as the resource requirements (especially large memory requirements) have a huge impact on performance. If an application is well suited to run inside an enclave a single-digit percentage overhead can be expected.

Confidential virtual machines based on AMD SEV-SNP require no changes to the executed program and operating system and are a lot easier to benchmark. A [benchmark from Azure and AMD shows](https://community.amd.com/t5/business/microsoft-azure-confidential-computing-powered-by-3rd-gen-epyc/ba-p/497796) that SEV-SNP VM overhead is <10%, sometimes as low as 2%.

Although there is a performance overhead, it should be low enough to enable real-world workloads to run in these protected environments and improve the security and privacy of our data.

> ## Confidential Computing compared to FHE, ZKP, and MPC

Reviewer: Don't think this is necessary.

Author: I would also like to keep it. Lot's of folks have heard about the concepts (mostly FHE). This allows us to highlight that CC (in general) is more user friendly and has additional properties.

## Use Cases of Confidential Computing

The presented confidential computing platforms show that both the isolation of a single process and therefore minimization of the trusted computing base, and the isolation of a full virtual machine are possible. This already enabled a lot of interesting and secure projects to emerge:

### Confidential Containers

The [Confidential Containers project](https://github.com/confidential-containers) enables users to run a container inside a confidential context. It provides an abstraction layer so that users do not need to interface directly with the confidential computing hardware.

Confidential Containers is a [CNCF sandbox project](https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/what-confidential-containers-project).

> > TODO: @Tobin/Mikko (or other CoCo folks) can you expand on this chapter?

Reviewer: Yes

Author: Awesome - thanks so much for providing this @mkbhanda!

---
layout: blog
title: "Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security."
date: 2023-01-17
slug: "confidential-kubernetes"
---

> **Authors:** Fabian Kammel (Edgeless Systems), (more to add...)

Reviewer 3: Noting that this is pending a fix

/retitle [WIP] Add blog post on Confidential Kubernetes

Author: I have added @mythi & @fitzthum as additional authors and removed the TODO.

Let me know (or propose a change) to add yourself as an author!

> # Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
# Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security.
```
This heading can be removed while the title has the same role.

In this blog post, we will introduce the concept of Confidential Computing (CC) to improve the security and privacy properties of any computing environment. Further, we will show how the Cloud-Native ecosystem, and Kubernetes in particular, can benefit from the new compute paradigm.

> ## Intro

Reviewer 3: You don't need to have a heading to say that you're introducing the article; this can be implied. I would remove this heading or change the wording.

> The [Whitepaper](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2022/11/CCC-A-Technical-Analysis-of-Confidential-Computing-v1.2_updated_2022-11-02.pdf) produced by the [Confidential Computing Consortium](https://confidentialcomputing.io/), a [LinuxFoundation](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2019/12/CCC_Overview.pdf) project, provides a great motivation for the usage of Confidential Computing:

Reviewer 3: - “Linux Foundation” (with a space)
- To hyperlink to https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2019/12/CCC_Overview.pdf, use the link text “Defining and Enabling Confidential Computing” (you will need to reword)

SEV can also calculate a signature of the memory contents, which can be sent to the VM's owner as an attestation that the memory was encrypted correctly by the firmware.
The second generation of SEV called [Encrypted State (SEV-ES)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/Protecting%20VM%20Register%20State%20with%20SEV-ES.pdf) provides additional protection from the hypervisor by encrypting all CPU register contents when a VM stops running.
The third generation of SEV called [Secure Nested Paging (SNP)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf) is designed to prevent software-based integrity attacks and reduce the risk associated with
compromised memory integrity. The basic principle of SEV-SNP integrity is that if a VM can read
a private (encrypted) memory page, it must always read the value it last wrote.
Additionally, by allowing the guest to obtain remote attestation statements dynamically, SNP enhances the remote attestation capabilities of SEV.

> SEV is continually upgraded with new features and improvements with each new generation. The Linux community makes these features available as part of the KVM hypervisor, host, and guest kernel. The first SEV features were discussed and implemented in [2016](https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/kaplan). After that, the SEV-ES feature set was implemented in [2020](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-ES-Linux-2020-Patches). Recently, the latest feature set was [merged in Linux 5.19 in July 2022](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-SNP-Arrives-Linux-5.19) and enabled support for SEV-SNP.

Reviewer 3: Try this:
```suggestion
AMD SEV is continually upgraded with new features and improvements with each new generation. The Linux community makes these features available as part of the KVM hypervisor, and for host and guest kernels. The first SEV features were discussed and implemented in 2016 - see [AMD x86 Memory Encryption Technologies](https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/kaplan) from the 2016 Usenix Security Symposium.

After that, the SEV-ES feature set was [implemented](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-ES-Linux-2020-Patches) for Linux in 2020. Recently, an updated feature set was [released](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-SNP-Arrives-Linux-5.19) as part of Linux 5.19 in July 2022, which enabled support for SEV-SNP.
```

> Confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-SNP are [available in Microsoft Azure since July 2022](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/updates/azureconfidentialvm/). Similarly, [Google Cloud Platform (GCP)](https://cloud.google.com/compute/confidential-vm/docs/about-cvm) offers confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-ES.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-SNP](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/updates/azureconfidentialvm/)) are available in Microsoft Azure since July 2022. Similarly, Google Cloud Platform offers [confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-ES](https://cloud.google.com/compute/confidential-vm/docs/about-cvm).
```

### Intel SGX

> [Intel's Software Guard Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/software-guard-extensions/overview.html) is available since 2015 [introduced with the Skylake architecture](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/88172/intel-xeon-processor-e31220-v5-8m-cache-3-00-ghz.html).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Intel's [Software Guard Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/software-guard-extensions/overview.html) are available since 2015, and were introduced with the Skylake architecture.
```
I removed the link because https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/products/88172/intel-xeon-processor-e31220-v5-8m-cache-3-00-ghz.html is not a page about Skylake; it is a page about a particular Intel SKU / product.

SGX is a new instruction set that enables users to create a protected and isolated process called an *enclave*.

> It provides a reverse sandbox that protects enclaves from the OS, BIOS, firmware, and any other privileged execution context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It provides a reverse sandbox that protects enclaves from the operating system, firmware, and any other privileged execution context.
```
A BIOS is a kind of firmware.

The enclave memory cannot be read or written from outside the enclave, regardless of the current privilege level and CPU mode. The only way to call an enclave function is through a new instruction that performs several protection checks. Its memory is encrypted. Tapping the memory or connecting the DRAM modules to another system will yield only encrypted data. The memory encryption key randomly changes every power cycle. The key is stored within the CPU and is not accessible.

> The 3rd Generation Xeon CPUs (aka Ice Lake Server - "ICX") did switch to using a technology called [Total Memory Encryption - Multi-Key (TME-MK)](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/runtime-encryption-of-memory-with-intel-tme-mk.html) that uses AES-XTS, moving away from the [Memory Encryption Engine](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/204.pdf) that the consumer and Xeon E CPUs used. This increased the possible [EPC](https://sgx101.gitbook.io/sgx101/sgx-bootstrap/enclave#enclave-page-cache-epc) size (up to 512GB/CPU) as well as gained a big increase in performance. More info about SGX on multi-socket platforms can be found in the [Whitepaper](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/supporting-intel-sgx-on-mulit-socket-platforms.pdf)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The 3rd generation Xeon CPUs (aka Ice Lake Server - "ICX") did switch to using a technology called [Total Memory Encryption - Multi-Key](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/runtime-encryption-of-memory-with-intel-tme-mk.html)  (TME-MK) that uses AES-XTS, moving away from the [Memory Encryption Engine](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/204.pdf) that the consumer and Xeon E CPUs used. This increased the possible [enclave page cache](https://sgx101.gitbook.io/sgx101/sgx-bootstrap/enclave#enclave-page-cache-epc) size (up to 512GB/CPU) as well as providing a big increase in performance.

You can find more information about Intel SGX on multi-socket platforms in the whitepaper [Supporting Intel® SGX on Multi-Socket Platforms](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/supporting-intel-sgx-on-mulit-socket-platforms.pdf).
```

> A complete list of supported platforms is available on [ark.intel.com](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/search/featurefilter.html?productType=873&2_SoftwareGuardExtensions=Yes%20with%20both%20Intel%C2%AE%20SPS%20and%20Intel%C2%AE%20ME).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A [list of supported platforms](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/search/featurefilter.html?productType=873&2_SoftwareGuardExtensions=Yes%20with%20both%20Intel%C2%AE%20SPS%20and%20Intel%C2%AE%20ME) is available from Intel.
```

## Overhead Analysis

The benefits that confidential computing technologies provide via strong isolation and enhanced security to customer data and workloads are not for free. Quantifying this impact isn't easy and depends on many factors: The TEE technology, the benchmark, the metrics, and the type of workload have a huge impact on the induced performance overhead.

Intel SGX-based TEEs are hard to benchmark as [shown](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.06415.pdf) [by](https://www.ibr.cs.tu-bs.de/users/mahhouk/papers/eurosec2021.pdf) [different papers](https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3533737.3535098). Since enclaves are process isolated, the operating system's libraries are not available and additional SDKs are required to compile programs for SGX. The chosen SDK as well as the resource requirements (especially large memory requirements) have a huge impact on performance. If an application is well suited to run inside an enclave a single-digit percentage overhead can be expected.

> Confidential virtual machines based on AMD SEV-SNP require no changes to the executed program and operating system and are a lot easier to benchmark. A [benchmark from Azure and AMD shows](https://community.amd.com/t5/business/microsoft-azure-confidential-computing-powered-by-3rd-gen-epyc/ba-p/497796) that SEV-SNP VM overhead is <10%, sometimes as low as 2%.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Confidential virtual machines based on AMD SEV-SNP require no changes to the executed program and operating system and are a lot easier to benchmark. A [benchmark from Azure and AMD](https://community.amd.com/t5/business/microsoft-azure-confidential-computing-powered-by-3rd-gen-epyc/ba-p/497796) shows that SEV-SNP VM overhead is <10%, sometimes as low as 2%.
```

## Confidential Computing compared to FHE, ZKP, and MPC

Fully Homomorphic Encryption (FHE), Zero Knowledge Proof/Protocol (ZKP), and Multi-Party Computations (MPC) are all a form of encryption or cryptographic protocols that offer similar security guarantees to confidential computing but do not require hardware support.

Fully (also partially and somewhat) homomorphic encryption allows one to perform computations, such as addition or multiplication, on encrypted data. This provides the property of encryption in use but does not provide integrity protection or attestation.

Zero Knowledge Proofs or Protocols are a privacy-preserving technique (PPT) that allows one party to prove facts about their data without revealing anything else about the data. ZKP can be used instead of or in addition to confidential computing to protect the privacy of the involved parties and their data. Similarly, Multi-Party Computation enables multiple parties to work together on a computation, i.e, each party provides their data to the result, without leaking their data to any of the other parties.

> # Use Cases of Confidential Computing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Use Cases of Confidential Computing
```
A topic only can have one heading 1, but this PR has four now.

The presented confidential computing platforms show that both the isolation of a single process and therefore minimization of the trusted computing base, and the isolation of a full virtual machine are possible. This already enabled a lot of interesting and secure projects to emerge:

## Confidential Containers

The [Confidential Containers project](https://github.com/confidential-containers) enables users to run a container inside a confidential context. It provides an abstraction layer so that users do not need to interface directly with the confidential computing hardware.

> Confidential Containers is a [CNCF sandbox project](https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/what-confidential-containers-project).

Reviewer 3: This isn't quite the right link.
```suggestion
[Confidential Containers](https://www.cncf.io/projects/confidential-containers/) is a CNCF sandbox project.
```

> > TODO: @Tobin/Mikko (or other CoCo folks) can you expand on this chapter?

Reviewer 3: Calling out a **TODO** here.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
CoCo offers an extension to Kubernetes clusters that are comprised of bare metal nodes
that support TEEs, to launch containerized workloads within a TEE created on the fly. The
CoCo container runtime first launches a TEE, then demonstrates its validity, followed by
verifying the container image signature and seeking any decryption keys to launch the
container.

Note the entire image handling occurs within a TEE. Coco's near term goals are to include
non-bare metal Kubernetes clusters and further separate management and tenant APIs
to restrict the Kubernetes cluster admin access to the tenant pods and the containers within.
CoCo currently supports both AMD and Intel TEE solutions. It is defining both a generic
Key Broker and Attestation service to support a end-to-end confidential flow.
```
from https://github.com/mkbhanda in https://github.com/kubernetes/website/pull/38973/files#r1084549379

Author: > Calling out a **TODO** here.

I have removed the TODO since @mkbhanda provided a great summary of CoCo. 

Still if you have any further improvements on the chapter let me know or suggest edits 🙂

## Managed Confidential Kubernetes

[Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-node-pool-aks) and [GCP](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/announcing-general-availability-of-confidential-gke-nodes) both support the use of confidential virtual machines as worker nodes for their managed Kubernetes offerings.

Both services aim for better workload protection and security guarantees by enabling memory encryption for container workloads. However, they don't seek to fully isolate the cluster or workloads against the service provider or infrastructure. Specifically, they don't offer a dedicated confidential control plane or expose attestation capabilities for the confidential cluster/nodes.

> Azure also enables [Confidential Containers](https://github.com/confidential-containers) in their managed Kubernetes offering. They support the creation based on [Intel SGX enclaves](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-containers-enclaves) and [AMD SEV-based VMs](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-confidential-computing/microsoft-introduces-preview-of-confidential-containers-on-azure/ba-p/3410394).

Reviewer 3: Can we list other providers, eg Alibaba - https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/container-service-for-kubernetes/latest/tee-based-confidential-computing-tee-based-confidential-computing?

We should also assert what the trust model / threat model looks like for a provider. For example, if there is no attestation capability, do you need to trust that your provider is delivering the service they claim to? Also, do we now rely on the CPU vendor more than we previously did?

Reviewer 5: from what I can tell Alibaba's ACK is using inclavare and occulum.  which is great! but we should probably list Inclavare and Occulum at the top level, and examples of *using* those as use cases.  Same for Azure too I think.

## Constellation

> [Constellation is a Kubernetes engine](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation) that aims to provide the best possible data security. It wraps your entire Kubernetes cluster into a single confidential context that is shielded from the underlying cloud infrastructure. Everything inside is always encrypted, including at runtime in memory. It shields both the worker and control plane nodes. In addition, it already integrates with popular CNCF software such as Cilium for secure networking and provides extended CSI drivers to write data securely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Constellation](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation) is a Kubernetes engine that aims to provide the best possible data security. Constellaton wraps your entire Kubernetes cluster into a single confidential context that is shielded from the underlying cloud infrastructure. Everything inside is always encrypted, including at runtime in memory. It shields both the worker and control plane nodes. In addition, it already integrates with popular CNCF software such as Cilium for secure networking and provides extended CSI drivers to write data securely.
```

> > TODO: Please add any interesting open-source projects in the space we should highlight!

Reviewer 3: Calling out a **TODO** here.

Author: Resolved

As we have seen in the previous sections confidential computing is a powerful new concept to improve security, but we are still in the (early) adoption phase. New products are starting to emerge to take advantage of the new properties.

Google and Microsoft are the first major cloud providers to have confidential offerings. Still, these offerings are limited to compute and end-to-end solutions for confidential databases, cluster networking, and load balancers have to be self-managed.

At the same time using these new technologies provides us with new opportunities to bring even the most sensitive workloads into the cloud. This enables them to leverage all the tools in the CNCF landscape.

# Call to action

If you are currently working on a high-security product that struggles to run in the public cloud due to legal requirements or are looking to bring the privacy and security of your cloud-native project to the next level: Reach out to all the great projects we have highlighted! Everyone is keen to improve security of our ecosystem and you can play a vital role in that journey.

* [Confidential Containers](https://github.com/confidential-containers)

> * [Constellation: Always encrypted K8s](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Constellation: Always Encrypted Kubernetes](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation)
```

> > TODO: Do we have a full list of CNCF-related CC projects? We should link to their GitHub to encourage adoption and contributions.

Reviewer 3: Calling out a **TODO** here.

Reviewer 5: maybe link to: https://confidentialcomputing.io/projects/

---
layout: blog
title: "Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security."
date: 2023-01-17
slug: "confidential-kubernetes"
---

**Authors:** Fabian Kammel (Edgeless Systems), (more to add...)

In this blog post, we will introduce the concept of Confidential Computing (CC) to improve

> the security and privacy properties of any computing environment. Further, we will show how

Reviewer 3: “we will” is fine, honestly

the Cloud-Native ecosystem, and Kubernetes in particular, can benefit from the new compute paradigm.

Confidential Computing is not a new concept in the cloud-native world. The
[Confidential Computing Consortium](https://confidentialcomputing.io/) is a Linux Foundation
that already worked on
[Defining and Enabling Confidential Computing](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2019/12/CCC_Overview.pdf).

> In the [Whitepaper](https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2022/11/CCC-A-Technical-Analysis-of-Confidential-Computing-v1.2_updated_2022-11-02.pdf)

Reviewer 6: Whitepaper link seems to be dead.. link to v1.3 works:
https://confidentialcomputing.io/wp-content/uploads/sites/85/2023/01/CCC-A-Technical-Analysis-of-Confidential-Computing-v1.3_Updated_November_2022.pdf

to the CPU-based solutions by Intel and AMD.

### Security properties and feature set

In the following, we will review the security properties and additional features these
new technologies bring to the table. Not all solutions will provide all properties, and
we will discuss each technology in further detail in their respective chapter.

The **Confidentiality** property ensures that information cannot be viewed while it is
in use in the TEE. This provides us with the highly desired feature to secure
**data in use**. Depending on the specific TEE used, both code and data may be protected
from outside viewers.

Confidentiality is a great feature, but an attacker would still be able to manipulate
or inject arbitrary code and data for the TEE to execute and therefore easily leak critical
information. **Integrity** guarantees a TEE owner that neither code nor data can be
tampered with while running critical computations.

*Availability* is the third basic property often discussed in the context of information
security. This property is outside the scope of most TEEs. Usually, they can be controlled

> (shut down, restarted, …) by some higher-level concept. This could be the CPU itself, a

Reviewer 3: Maybe “higher level abstraction”.

hypervisor, or a kernel. This is to preserve the availability of the overall system, and
not the TEE itself. When running in the cloud the availability is usually guaranteed by
the cloud provider in terms of Service Level Agreements (SLAs) and is not cryptographically enforceable.

Confidentiality and Integrity by themselves would only be helpful in some cases. For example,
consider a TEE running in a remote cloud. How would you know that the TEE is genuine and running
your intended software? It could be an imposter stealing your data as soon as you send it over.
This fundamental problem is addressed by **Attestability**. Attestation allows us to verify
the identity, confidentiality, and integrity of TEEs based on cryptographic certificates issued
from the hardware itself. This feature can also be made available to clients outside of the
confidential computing hardware in the form of remote attestation.

> TEEs can hold and process information that needs to persist even beyond their lifespan. That

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
TEEs can hold and process information that predates or outlives the trusted environment. That
```

How about this?

> TEEs can hold and process information that needs to persist even beyond their lifespan. That

Reviewer 7: looks good, it highlights that the workload is the thing that lives on, the TEE is a vessel.

> could mean across restarts, different versions, or platform migrations. Therefore **Recoverability**

Author: I would like to keep as is, since this list is not meant to be exhaustive, but only hint at different concepts. Pause and restart are similar in that regard.

> is an important feature. Data and the state of a TEE need to be sealed before they are written

Reviewer 3: Nope: “Recoverability is an important feature” is idiomatic English.

to persistent storage to maintain confidentiality and integrity guarantees. The access to such
sealed data needs to be well-defined. In most cases, the unsealing is bound to a TEE's identity.
Hence, making sure the recovery can only happen in the same confidential context.

> 

Author: I am not sure what you are suggesting here. Is this a feature you would like to see supported in future versions of SNP/TDX?

This does not have to limit the flexibility of the overall system. The
[migration agent (MA) of AMD SEV-SNP](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf)

> allows users to migrate a confidential virtual machine to a different host system. All

Reviewer 3: You didn't specify a replacement?

> allows users to migrate a confidential virtual machine to a different host system. All

Author: I think the suggestion was to merge the sentence.

each new CPU generation. The Linux community makes these features available as part of the KVM hypervisor,
and for host and guest kernels. The first SEV features were discussed and implemented in 2016 - see
[AMD x86 Memory Encryption Technologies](https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/kaplan)
from the 2016 Usenix Security Symposium.

After that, the SEV-ES feature set was implemented in
[2020](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-ES-Linux-2020-Patches). Recently, the latest feature set
was [merged in Linux 5.19 in July 2022](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-SNP-Arrives-Linux-5.19)
and enabled support for SEV-SNP.

[Confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-SNP](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/updates/azureconfidentialvm/)
are available in Microsoft Azure since July 2022. Similarly, Google Cloud Platform (GCP) offers
[confidential VMs based on AMD SEV-ES](https://cloud.google.com/compute/confidential-vm/docs/about-cvm).

### Intel SGX

Intel's
[Software Guard Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/software-guard-extensions/overview.html)

> has been available since 2015, and were introduced with the Skylake architecture.

Reviewer 3: “has” is idiomatic English, I'm afraid

> has been available since 2015, and were introduced with the Skylake architecture.

Author: ```suggestion
has been available since 2015 and were introduced with the Skylake architecture.
```

data. The memory encryption key randomly changes every power cycle. The key is stored
within the CPU and is not accessible.

The 3rd generation Xeon CPUs (aka Ice Lake Server - "ICX") did switch to using a technology called
[Total Memory Encryption - Multi-Key](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/runtime-encryption-of-memory-with-intel-tme-mk.html)
(TME-MK) that uses AES-XTS, moving away from the
[Memory Encryption Engine](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/204.pdf)
that the consumer and Xeon E CPUs used. This increased the possible
[enclave page cache](https://sgx101.gitbook.io/sgx101/sgx-bootstrap/enclave#enclave-page-cache-epc)
(EPC) size (up to 512GB/CPU) as well as providing a big increase in performance. More info
about SGX on multi-socket platforms can be found in the
[Whitepaper](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/supporting-intel-sgx-on-mulit-socket-platforms.pdf)

A [list of supported platforms](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/search/featurefilter.html?productType=873&2_SoftwareGuardExtensions=Yes%20with%20both%20Intel%C2%AE%20SPS%20and%20Intel%C2%AE%20ME)
is available from Intel.

> However, there are still several security limitations faced by SGX. Such as Cache

Author: I have rewritten this section and removed the links to specific attacks.

> timing attacks, physical attacks, untrusted I/O, or malicious microcode patching.

Reviewer 3: I'm happy with “or” in this context.

[Several SGX-specific attacks](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2006.13598.pdf) were published.
Among others [Prime+Probe](https://gruss.cc/files/malware_guard_extension.pdf) and
[SGAxe](https://sgaxe.com/files/SGAxe.pdf).

> > TODO: Should we mention attacks? If we do, we should also mention attacks on all technologies. Do we have a stance / recommendation here or do we provide the information and let the reader decide?

Author: I have removed links to attack. A full analysis of attacks for all technologies is out of scope.

SGX is available on
[Azure](https://azure.microsoft.com/de-de/updates/intel-sgx-based-confidential-computing-vms-now-available-on-azure-dedicated-hosts/),
[Alibaba Cloud](https://azure.microsoft.com/de-de/updates/intel-sgx-based-confidential-computing-vms-now-available-on-azure-dedicated-hosts/),
[IBM](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/bare-metal?topic=bare-metal-bm-server-provision-sgx), and many more.

### Intel TDX

Where Intel SGX aims to protect the context of a single process,
[Intel's Trusted Domain Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-trust-domain-extensions.html)

> protects a full virtual machine and is therefore most closely comparable to AMD SEV.

Reviewer 3: I prefer
```suggestion
protect a full virtual machine and are therefore most closely comparable to AMD SEV.
```

Fully (also partially and somewhat) homomorphic encryption allows one to perform
computations, such as addition or multiplication, on encrypted data. This provides
the property of encryption in use but does not provide integrity protection or attestation.

Zero Knowledge Proofs or Protocols are a privacy-preserving technique (PPT) that
allows one party to prove facts about their data without revealing anything else about
the data. ZKP can be used instead of or in addition to Confidential Computing to protect
the privacy of the involved parties and their data. Similarly, Multi-Party Computation
enables multiple parties to work together on a computation, i.e, each party provides
their data to the result, without leaking their data to any of the other parties.

## Use cases of Confidential Computing

The presented Confidential Computing platforms show that both the isolation of a single
process and therefore minimization of the trusted computing base, and the isolation of a
full virtual machine are possible. This already enabled a lot of interesting and secure
projects to emerge:

### Confidential Containers

> The [Confidential Containers project](https://github.com/confidential-containers) enables users

Reviewer 3: How about, then:
```suggestion
The [Confidential Containers](https://github.com/confidential-containers) (CoCo) project enables users
```

to run a container inside a confidential context. It provides an abstraction layer so that
users do not need to interface directly with the Confidential Computing hardware.

[Confidential Containers](https://www.cncf.io/projects/confidential-containers/) is a CNCF sandbox project.

> TODO: @Tobin/Mikko (or other CoCo folks) can you expand on this chapter?

### Managed confidential Kubernetes

[Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-node-pool-aks) and
[GCP](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/announcing-general-availability-of-confidential-gke-nodes)
both support the use of confidential virtual machines as worker nodes for their managed Kubernetes offerings.

Both services aim for better workload protection and security guarantees by enabling memory encryption
for container workloads. However, they don't seek to fully isolate the cluster or workloads against

> the service provider or infrastructure. Specifically, they don't offer a dedicated confidential control

Reviewer 3: This changes the meaning. Remember, not all workloads are hosted with a supplier. I like the original.

> the service provider or infrastructure. Specifically, they don't offer a dedicated confidential control

Author: I will keep the original.

in their managed Kubernetes offering. They support the creation based on
[Intel SGX enclaves](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-containers-enclaves)
and [AMD SEV-based VMs](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-confidential-computing/microsoft-introduces-preview-of-confidential-containers-on-azure/ba-p/3410394).

### Constellation

[Constellation](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation) is a Kubernetes engine that aims to
provide the best possible data security. Constellation wraps your entire Kubernetes cluster into
a single confidential context that is shielded from the underlying cloud infrastructure. Everything
inside is always encrypted, including at runtime in memory. It shields both the worker and control
plane nodes. In addition, it already integrates with popular CNCF software such as Cilium for
secure networking and provides extended CSI drivers to write data securely.

> TODO: Please add any interesting open-source projects in the space we should highlight!

## Where are we today? Vendors, limitations, and FOSS landscape

As we have seen in the previous sections Confidential Computing is a powerful new concept

> to improve security, but we are still in the (early) adoption phase. New products are

Reviewer 3: I'm happy with your original text here @datosh

> to improve security, but we are still in the (early) adoption phase. New products are

Author: I changed `new properties` to `unique properties` to remove the repeated usage of `new` in the same sentence.

starting to emerge to take advantage of the new properties.

Google and Microsoft are the first major cloud providers to have confidential offerings.

> Still, these offerings are limited to compute and end-to-end solutions for confidential

Reviewer 3: I'm happy with your original text here @datosh

> Still, these offerings are limited to compute and end-to-end solutions for confidential

Author: Accepted "while", it highlights the gap in actual service offerings clearer.

databases, cluster networking, and load balancers have to be self-managed.

At the same time using these new technologies provides us with new opportunities to bring
even the most sensitive workloads into the cloud. This enables them to leverage all the
tools in the CNCF landscape.

## Call to action

If you are currently working on a high-security product that struggles to run in the
public cloud due to legal requirements or are looking to bring the privacy and security

> of your cloud-native project to the next level: Reach out to all the great projects

Author: Technical is good, but lets have some good vibes to get folks excited to contribute 🙂

data. The memory encryption key randomly changes every power cycle. The key is stored
within the CPU and is not accessible.

The 3rd generation Xeon CPUs (aka Ice Lake Server - "ICX") did switch to using a technology called
[Total Memory Encryption - Multi-Key](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/news/runtime-encryption-of-memory-with-intel-tme-mk.html)
(TME-MK) that uses AES-XTS, moving away from the
[Memory Encryption Engine](https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/204.pdf)
that the consumer and Xeon E CPUs used. This increased the possible
[enclave page cache](https://sgx101.gitbook.io/sgx101/sgx-bootstrap/enclave#enclave-page-cache-epc)
(EPC) size (up to 512GB/CPU) as well as providing a big increase in performance. More info
about SGX on multi-socket platforms can be found in the
[Whitepaper](https://www.intel.com/content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/white-papers/supporting-intel-sgx-on-mulit-socket-platforms.pdf)

A [list of supported platforms](https://ark.intel.com/content/www/us/en/ark/search/featurefilter.html?productType=873&2_SoftwareGuardExtensions=Yes%20with%20both%20Intel%C2%AE%20SPS%20and%20Intel%C2%AE%20ME)

> is available from Intel.

Author: Yes, the filter was too restrictive. I fixed it.

However, there are security limitations, such as cache timing attacks, physical attacks,
untrusted I/O, or malicious microcode patching. Each project has different security requirements
and needs to decide, if the added security of SGX and its limitations, are sufficient.

> 

Author: This is the replacement. Instead of citing specific attacks we list the classes of attacks so users can use that as a starting point for more research on the topic. Do you think this section is a good starting point for that?

SGX is available on
[Azure](https://azure.microsoft.com/de-de/updates/intel-sgx-based-confidential-computing-vms-now-available-on-azure-dedicated-hosts/),

> [Alibaba Cloud](https://azure.microsoft.com/de-de/updates/intel-sgx-based-confidential-computing-vms-now-available-on-azure-dedicated-hosts/),

Author: fixed the link

[IBM](https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/bare-metal?topic=bare-metal-bm-server-provision-sgx), and many more.

### Intel TDX

Where Intel SGX aims to protect the context of a single process,
[Intel's Trusted Domain Extensions](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/intel-trust-domain-extensions.html)
protect a full virtual machine and are therefore most closely comparable to AMD SEV.

As with SEV-SNP, guest support for TDX was [merged in Linux Kernel 5.19](https://www.phoronix.com/news/Intel-TDX-For-Linux-5.19),

> but hardware support will land with [Saphire Rapids](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sapphire_Rapids) in early 2023.

Reviewer 3: Avoid hard statements about the future unless _the Kubernetes project_ is committing to making these come true.

Kubernetes cluster admin access to the tenant pods and the containers within.
CoCo currently supports both AMD and Intel TEE solutions. It is defining both
a generic Key Broker and Attestation service to support an end-to-end confidential
flow.

### Managed confidential Kubernetes

[Azure](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-node-pool-aks) and
[GCP](https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/identity-security/announcing-general-availability-of-confidential-gke-nodes)
both support the use of confidential virtual machines as worker nodes for their managed Kubernetes offerings.

Both services aim for better workload protection and security guarantees by enabling memory encryption
for container workloads. However, they don't seek to fully isolate the cluster or workloads against
the service provider or infrastructure. Specifically, they don't offer a dedicated confidential control
plane or expose attestation capabilities for the confidential cluster/nodes.

Azure also enables [Confidential Containers](https://github.com/confidential-containers)
in their managed Kubernetes offering. They support the creation based on

> [Intel SGX enclaves](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-containers-enclaves)

Author: I have replaced the link with: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-nodes-aks-overview

Do you think this is more fitting? I have not used any confidential computing features of the AKS offering myself.

to persistent storage to maintain confidentiality and integrity guarantees. The access to such
sealed data needs to be well-defined. In most cases, the unsealing is bound to a TEE's identity.
Hence, making sure the recovery can only happen in the same confidential context.

This does not have to limit the flexibility of the overall system. The
[migration agent (MA) of AMD SEV-SNP](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf)
allows users to migrate a confidential virtual machine to a different host system
while keeping the security properties of the TEE intact.

## Feature comparison

In the following, we will dive a little bit deeper into the specific implementations,
compare supported features and analyze their security properties.

### AMD SEV

AMD's [Secure Encrypted Virtualization (SEV)](https://developer.amd.com/sev/) technologies
are a set of features to enhance the security of virtual machines on AMD's server CPUs. SEV
transparently encrypts the memory of each VM with a unique key. SEV can also calculate a
signature of the memory contents, which can be sent to the VM's owner as an attestation that

> the memory was encrypted correctly by the firmware.

Reviewer: The attestation is about more than ensuring that the firmware correctly encrypted the initial guest memory. I think the main idea is that it guarantees to the guest owner that the initial guest memory is what the expect.

The second generation of SEV, known as
[Encrypted State](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/Protecting%20VM%20Register%20State%20with%20SEV-ES.pdf)

> or SEV-ES provides additional protection from the hypervisor by encrypting all CPU register contents when a VM stops running.

Reviewer: `when a VM stops running` is a little bit ambiguous. To be clear, the registers are protected every time the guest stops executing i.e. a context switch.

or SEV-SNP is designed to prevent software-based integrity attacks and reduce the risk associated with
compromised memory integrity. The basic principle of SEV-SNP integrity is that if a VM can read
a private (encrypted) memory page, it must always read the value it last wrote.

Additionally, by allowing the guest to obtain remote attestation statements dynamically,
SNP enhances the remote attestation capabilities of SEV.

AMD SEV has been implemented incrementally. New features and improvements have been added with
each new CPU generation. The Linux community makes these features available as part of the KVM hypervisor,
and for host and guest kernels. The first SEV features were discussed and implemented in 2016 - see
[AMD x86 Memory Encryption Technologies](https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity16/technical-sessions/presentation/kaplan)
from the 2016 Usenix Security Symposium.

After that, the SEV-ES feature set was implemented in
[2020](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-ES-Linux-2020-Patches). Recently, the latest feature set
was [merged in Linux 5.19 in July 2022](https://www.phoronix.com/news/AMD-SEV-SNP-Arrives-Linux-5.19)

> and enabled support for SEV-SNP.

Reviewer: This is only the guest support. The host support is still pending. Honestly I don't think these sections on the timeline of the Linux implementation are necessary. They are also a bit redundant with the previous description of each feature.

Author: shortened this section a bit

Fully (also partially and somewhat) homomorphic encryption allows one to perform
computations, such as addition or multiplication, on encrypted data. This provides
the property of encryption in use but does not provide integrity protection or attestation.

Zero Knowledge Proofs or Protocols are a privacy-preserving technique (PPT) that
allows one party to prove facts about their data without revealing anything else about
the data. ZKP can be used instead of or in addition to Confidential Computing to protect
the privacy of the involved parties and their data. Similarly, Multi-Party Computation
enables multiple parties to work together on a computation, i.e, each party provides
their data to the result, without leaking their data to any of the other parties.

## Use cases of Confidential Computing

The presented Confidential Computing platforms show that both the isolation of a single container
process and therefore minimization of the trusted computing base, and the isolation of a
full virtual machine are possible. This already enabled a lot of interesting and secure
projects to emerge:

### Confidential Containers

> The [Confidential Containers](https://github.com/confidential-containers) (CoCo) project enables users
> to process and run each container of a pod inside a confidential context.
> [Confidential Containers](https://www.cncf.io/projects/confidential-containers/) is a CNCF sandbox project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Confidential Containers](https://github.com/confidential-containers) (CoCo) is a CNCF sandbox project that isolates Kubernetes pods inside of confidential virtual machines.
```

Author: added

> CoCo offers an extension to Kubernetes clusters that are comprised of
> nodes that support TEEs, to launch containerized workloads within a TEE created
> on the fly. With CoCo, the entire lifecycle of a pod, including the image handling occurs
> within a TEE leaving the cluster node outside of the TCB: for each pod, a TEE is launched, followed by the verification of the container images' signatures before pull and seeking any
> decryption keys to launch the container. The image policy and layer decryption keys a obtained from a trusted *key broker service* that involves a TEE remote attestation as part of the process. Coco's near term goals are to move to CSPs' Kubernetes
> clusters and further separate management and tenant APIs to restrict the
> Kubernetes cluster admin access to the tenant pods and the containers within.
> CoCo currently supports both AMD and Intel TEE solutions. It is defining both
> a generic Key Broker and Attestation service to support an end-to-end confidential
> flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CoCo can be installed on a Kubernetes cluster with an operator.
The operator will create a set of runtime classes that can be used to deploy
pods inside an enclave on several different platforms, including
AMD SEV, Intel TDX, Secure Execution for IBM Z, and Intel SGX.

CoCo is typically used with signed and/or encrypted container images
which are pulled, verified, and decrypted inside the enclave.
Secrets, such as image decryption keys, are conditionally provisioned
to the enclave by a trusted Key Broker Service that validates the
hardware evidence of the TEE prior to releasing any sensitive information.

CoCo has several deployment models. Since the Kubernetes control plane
is outside the TCB, CoCo is suitable for managed environments. CoCo can
be run in virtual environments that don't support nesting with the help of an
API adaptor that starts pod VMs in the cloud. CoCo can also be run on
bare metal, providing strong isolation even in multi-tenant environments.
```

---
layout: blog
title: "Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security."
date: 2023-01-17
slug: "confidential-kubernetes"
---

**Authors:** Fabian Kammel (Edgeless Systems), Mikko Ylinen (Intel), Tobin Feldman-Fitzthum (IBM)

In this blog post, we will introduce the concept of Confidential Computing (CC) to improve
the security and privacy properties of any computing environment. Further, we will show how
the Cloud-Native ecosystem, and Kubernetes in particular, can benefit from the new compute paradigm.

Confidential Computing is not a new concept in the cloud-native world. The

> [Confidential Computing Consortium](https://confidentialcomputing.io/) (CCC) is a Linux Foundation

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
[Confidential Computing Consortium](https://confidentialcomputing.io/) (CCC) is a project community in the Linux Foundation
```

computing hardware, in the form of [Hardware Security Modules](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hardware_security_module)
(HSMs) and [Trusted Platform Modules](https://www.iso.org/standard/50970.html) (TPMs). These
technologies provide trusted environments for shielded computations. They can be used to
store highly sensitive cryptographic keys and to carry out critical cryptographic operations
such as signing or encrypting data.

TPMs are optimized for low cost, allowing them to be integrated into mainboards and act as a
system's physical root of trust. To keep the cost low, TPMs are limited in scope, i.e., they
provide storage for only a few keys and are capable of just a small subset of cryptographic operations.

In contrast, HSMs are optimized for high performance, so they provide secure storage for far
more keys and offer advanced physical attack detection mechanisms. Additionally, high-end HSMs
can be programmed such that arbitrary code can be compiled and executed on them. The downside
is that they are very costly. A managed CloudHSM from AWS costs
[around $1.50 / hour](https://aws.amazon.com/cloudhsm/pricing/) or ~$13,500 / year.

> In recent years a new kind of TEE has gained popularity. Technologies like

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In recent years, a new kind of TEE has gained popularity. Technologies like
```

from the hardware itself. This feature can also be made available to clients outside of the
confidential computing hardware in the form of remote attestation.

TEEs can hold and process information that predates or outlives the trusted environment. That
could mean across restarts, different versions, or platform migrations. Therefore **Recoverability**
is an important feature. Data and the state of a TEE need to be sealed before they are written
to persistent storage to maintain confidentiality and integrity guarantees. The access to such
sealed data needs to be well-defined. In most cases, the unsealing is bound to a TEE's identity.
Hence, making sure the recovery can only happen in the same confidential context.

This does not have to limit the flexibility of the overall system. The
[migration agent (MA) of AMD SEV-SNP](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf)
allows users to migrate a confidential virtual machine to a different host system
while keeping the security properties of the TEE intact.

## Feature comparison

> In the following, we will dive a little bit deeper into the specific implementations,

Author: ```suggestion
These chapters will dive a little bit deeper into the specific implementations,
```

compare supported features and analyze their security properties.

### AMD SEV

AMD's [Secure Encrypted Virtualization (SEV)](https://developer.amd.com/sev/) technologies
are a set of features to enhance the security of virtual machines on AMD's server CPUs. SEV
transparently encrypts the memory of each VM with a unique key. SEV can also calculate a
signature of the memory contents, which can be sent to the VM's owner as an attestation that

> the inital guest memory was not manipulated.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
the initial guest memory was not manipulated.
```

SGX is an instruction set that enables users to create a protected and isolated process called
an *enclave*. It provides a reverse sandbox that protects enclaves from the operating system,
firmware, and any other privileged execution context.

The enclave memory cannot be read or written from outside the enclave, regardless of
the current privilege level and CPU mode. The only way to call an enclave function is
through a new instruction that performs several protection checks. Its memory is encrypted.
Tapping the memory or connecting the DRAM modules to another system will yield only encrypted
data. The memory encryption key randomly changes every power cycle. The key is stored
within the CPU and is not accessible.

Since the enclaves are process isolated, the operating system's libraries are not usable as is and
therefore SGX enclave SDKs are required to compile programs for SGX. This also implies applications
need to be designed and implemented to take the trusted/untrusted isolation boundaries into account
but on the other hand applications get built with very minimal TCB.

To avoid the need to build custom applications and to be able to move to process based confidential

> computing easier, an emerging approach is to use library OSes that help to run native unmodified Linux applications

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
computing easily, an emerging approach is to use library OSes that help to run native unmodified Linux applications
```

inside SGX enclaves. A library OS intercepts all application requests to host OS and processes them securely

> without the application knowing it's running a TEE.

Author: Thanks. This reads a lot better and the meaning is unchanged!

> The 3rd generation Xeon CPUs (aka Ice Lake Server - "ICX") and later did switch to using a technology called

Author: ```suggestion
The 3rd generation Xeon CPUs (aka Ice Lake Server - "ICX") and later generations did switch to using a technology called
```

I think we wanted to call out that it is the 3rd generation and all later generations that implement this new feature. I will repeat generation to make this clearer.

[Alibaba Cloud provides](https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/en/elastic-compute-service/latest/build-a-tdx-confidential-computing-environment)
invitational preview instances and also
[Azure has announced](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-confidential-computing/preview-introducing-dcesv5-and-ecesv5-series-confidential-vms/ba-p/3800718)
its TDX preview opportunity.

## Overhead analysis

The benefits that Confidential Computing technologies provide via strong isolation and enhanced
security to customer data and workloads are not for free. Quantifying this impact isn't easy and
depends on many factors: The TEE technology, the benchmark, the metrics, and the type of workload
all have a huge impact on the expected performance overhead.

Intel SGX-based TEEs are hard to benchmark as [shown](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2205.06415.pdf)
[by](https://www.ibr.cs.tu-bs.de/users/mahhouk/papers/eurosec2021.pdf)
[different papers](https://dl.acm.org/doi/fullHtml/10.1145/3533737.3535098). The chosen SDK/library
OS, the application itself, as well as the resource requirements (especially large memory requirements)

> have a huge impact on performance. If an application is well suited to run inside an enclave a single-digit

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
have a huge impact on performance. If an application is well suited to run inside an enclave, a single-digit
```

Fully (also partially and somewhat) homomorphic encryption allows one to perform
computations, such as addition or multiplication, on encrypted data. This provides
the property of encryption in use but does not provide integrity protection or attestation
like confidential computing does. Therefore, these two technologies can [complement to each other](https://confidentialcomputing.io/2023/03/29/confidential-computing-and-homomorphic-encryption/).

Zero Knowledge Proofs or Protocols are a privacy-preserving technique (PPT) that
allows one party to prove facts about their data without revealing anything else about
the data. ZKP can be used instead of or in addition to Confidential Computing to protect
the privacy of the involved parties and their data. Similarly, Multi-Party Computation
enables multiple parties to work together on a computation, i.e, each party provides
their data to the result, without leaking their data to any of the other parties.

## Use cases of Confidential Computing

The presented Confidential Computing platforms show that both the isolation of a single container
process and therefore minimization of the trusted computing base, and the isolation of a

> full virtual machine are possible. This already enabled a lot of interesting and secure

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
full virtual machine are possible. This has already enabled a lot of interesting and secure
```

in their managed Kubernetes offering. They support the creation based on
[Intel SGX enclaves](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/confidential-computing/confidential-containers-enclaves)
and [AMD SEV-based VMs](https://techcommunity.microsoft.com/t5/azure-confidential-computing/microsoft-introduces-preview-of-confidential-containers-on-azure/ba-p/3410394).

### Constellation

[Constellation](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation) is a Kubernetes engine that aims to
provide the best possible data security. Constellation wraps your entire Kubernetes cluster into
a single confidential context that is shielded from the underlying cloud infrastructure. Everything
inside is always encrypted, including at runtime in memory. It shields both the worker and control
plane nodes. In addition, it already integrates with popular CNCF software such as Cilium for
secure networking and provides extended CSI drivers to write data securely.

### Occlum and Gramine

[Occlum](https://occlum.io/) and [Gramine](https://gramineproject.io/) are examples of open source
library OS projects that can be used to run unmodified applications in SGX enclaves. They

> are member projects under the CCC but similar projects and products maintained by companies

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
are member projects under the CCC, but similar projects and products maintained by companies
```

> also exist. With these libOS projects existing containerized applications can be

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
also exist. With these libOS projects, existing containerized applications can be
```

easily converted into confidential computing enabled containers. Many curated prebuilt
containers are also available.

## Where are we today? Vendors, limitations, and FOSS landscape

As we have seen in the previous sections, Confidential Computing is a powerful new concept
to improve security, but we are still in the (early) adoption phase. New products are
starting to emerge to take advantage of the unique properties.

Google and Microsoft are the first major cloud providers to have confidential offerings.
Still, these offerings are limited to compute, while end-to-end solutions for confidential
databases, cluster networking, and load balancers have to be self-managed.

These technologies provide opportunities to bring even the most
sensitive workloads into the cloud and enables them to leverage all the
tools in the CNCF landscape.

## Call to action

If you are currently working on a high-security product that struggles to run in the
public cloud due to legal requirements or are looking to bring the privacy and security
of your cloud-native project to the next level: Reach out to all the great projects

> we have highlighted! Everyone is keen to improve security of our ecosystem and you can

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
we have highlighted! Everyone is keen to improve the security of our ecosystem and you can
```

> we have highlighted! Everyone is keen to improve the security of our ecosystem and you can

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
we have highlighted! Everyone is keen to improve the security of our ecosystem, and you can
```

---
layout: blog

> title: "Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security."

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: "Confidential Kubernetes: Use Confidential Virtual Machines and Enclaves to improve your cluster security"
```

from the hardware itself. This feature can also be made available to clients outside of the
confidential computing hardware in the form of remote attestation.

TEEs can hold and process information that predates or outlives the trusted environment. That
could mean across restarts, different versions, or platform migrations. Therefore **Recoverability**
is an important feature. Data and the state of a TEE need to be sealed before they are written
to persistent storage to maintain confidentiality and integrity guarantees. The access to such
sealed data needs to be well-defined. In most cases, the unsealing is bound to a TEE's identity.
Hence, making sure the recovery can only happen in the same confidential context.

This does not have to limit the flexibility of the overall system.
[AMD SEV-SNP's migration agent (MA)](https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/SEV-SNP-strengthening-vm-isolation-with-integrity-protection-and-more.pdf)
allows users to migrate a confidential virtual machine to a different host system
while keeping the security properties of the TEE intact.

## Feature comparison

> These chapters will dive a little bit deeper into the specific implementations,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These sections of the article will dive a little bit deeper into the specific implementations,
```

### Constellation

[Constellation](https://github.com/edgelesssys/constellation) is a Kubernetes engine that aims to
provide the best possible data security. Constellation wraps your entire Kubernetes cluster into
a single confidential context that is shielded from the underlying cloud infrastructure. Everything
inside is always encrypted, including at runtime in memory. It shields both the worker and control
plane nodes. In addition, it already integrates with popular CNCF software such as Cilium for
secure networking and provides extended CSI drivers to write data securely.

### Occlum and Gramine

[Occlum](https://occlum.io/) and [Gramine](https://gramineproject.io/) are examples of open source
library OS projects that can be used to run unmodified applications in SGX enclaves. They
are member projects under the CCC, but similar projects and products maintained by companies
also exist. With these libOS projects, existing containerized applications can be
easily converted into confidential computing enabled containers. Many curated prebuilt
containers are also available.

## Where are we today? Vendors, limitations, and FOSS landscape

> As we have seen in the previous sections, Confidential Computing is a powerful new concept

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As we hope you have seen from the previous sections, Confidential Computing is a powerful new concept
```

to improve security, but we are still in the (early) adoption phase. New products are
starting to emerge to take advantage of the unique properties.

> Google and Microsoft are the first major cloud providers to have confidential offerings.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Google and Microsoft are the first major cloud providers to have confidential offerings that
can run unmodified applications inside a protected boundary.
```
Nitro enclaves _are_ a thing (and have been since 2020ish), but not for unmodified workloads.
